hey big hello from raleigh north
carolina welcome to another episode of
b2b marketing and more i have very
special guest today
jenna driscoll miller she is author of
data first marketing and she is the
president and ceo
of a marketing mojo specializes in
digital ads seo and analytics
and i know that you probably think that
data
analytics marketing might be a boring
topic we are going to make it
interesting and useful insightful for
you so welcome to our show so how do you
feel today i feel great
feeling really good i'm feeling
fantastic so it's a great time to be out
and you know it's spring love being
outside so it's you're in raleigh i'm in
charlottesville so i'm not too far from
you yeah and you know this time of year
is beautiful so it's great to be out and
enjoying spring yeah excellent all right
let's talk about data first marketing
all right you wrote a book about that
can you tell us what is data first
marketing and how is that different from
say data driven yeah everybody wants to
be data driven in marketing and we all
talk about it but unfortunately i think
that a lot of folks miss the boat on
putting data at the beginning of what
they're doing so as an example what we
want to think about is we want to think
about those goals that we attribute for
our business so what are the businesses
goals a lot of times it's going to be
revenue or roi or lead generation yeah
yeah i mean that's a very typical
marketing goals
right so we want to put that at the
beginning and understand fully how we're
going to measure that throughout our
campaigns and be able to predict and
measure throughout the campaign
unfortunately a lot of times i think
marketers feel like you have to just
measure at the end of the campaign and
then assess what happened but in data
first we're talking about how do you
make sure you have accurate reporting
from the very beginning that you're
tracking everything correctly so that
you can really understand how you're
impacting those business goals
throughout the life cycle of a campaign
understood so what you are saying let me
paraphrase it is understand your goals
and how you're going to measure that
and instead of a process
while
you are developing your campaigns like
the creative concept the copywriting you
know the social media everything is very
very important but what you are trying
to say is put the data first if you want
to do that you have to set up a
processes in parallel to track that
while you are developing your campaign
correct and then as you're planning this
out we talk about we have a campaign
model that you can use a campaign
framework and one of the things is an
example that's at the beginning of that
framework is
using your persona data
i think that's really important yeah
understanding who am i creating this
content for and making sure you're
speaking to their needs in that content
you create and make put that as part of
your plan but then then how do you
distribute that content where do these
personas hang out where are you where do
they interact and so every step of the
campaign that persona data is very
important but are we really using that
to plan the entire campaign and to
really define in our campaign
who we're trying to attract and then
measuring on the back end as well
throughout the campaign if we're
actually achieving that goal of getting
to that that specific persona i 100
agree persona is the number one things
that the marketer actually need to make
a decision in terms of like who is the
person that we should talk to who is the
person that we should market to
unfortunately working in the corporate
world for a long period of time like the
sales people probably want to focus on
decision makers and then the the product
team probably want to focus on the broad
end users and then marketing was like
you know what we should focus on
specific job title
and i have come to realize that even
internally on the client side or on the
brands within the company if you will
they have a hard time determining who
the target audience is
but i do agree with you to make that
decision and also make that as tight as
possible in terms of who your audience
is can actually help you determine your
content your editorial at the same time
and have a greater success in terms of
your measurement
i was just going to add that sometimes
you have more than one persona as your
target audience as well like for
instance if you're selling hr software
your target audience while the hr user
might be the user of your software the
reality is the it department is involved
in that decision making process as well
and so you have two different audiences
with two different sets of challenges
and needs and information that they need
that the marketing department would need
to address in different ways and so
that's where that persona information
and understanding the data and how
people are buying your product are so
critical and that conversation between
marketing and sales to un fully
understand who are all the players in
this and how do we need to
address those audiences with our content
and with our reach
understood i 100 agree with you i think
that's also a challenge
the marketing department encounter like
if they actually have a two different
sets that's assumed completely different
sense of target audience and granted you
were trying to identify the challenges
the common challenges they encounter as
a starting point but like i t uh
managers versus say the marketing users
make the way that they see a platform
they need
is substantially different
and then that create a challenge if you
will for the marketers in terms of okay
what are the better way to reach out to
them it's not just the pay media effort
anymore it's kind of what kind of
content you can create that will
resonate with both a set of audience
from my perspective a lot of time the
number of personas also determined by
the marketing budget
and i have clients that really want to
talk to everybody but they have a finite
resources and budget and my
recommendation is always like can you
prioritize you need to prioritize you
need to prioritize you need to
prioritize
and another question i would like to ask
you is okay so data first and then we
need to set up the measurement upfront
and think through in terms of how we can
measure that along the way
and how can a company or the marketing
team make any assessment in terms of how
well they do in terms of data first type
of marketing effort how can they have a
baseline
so we created in the book but we also
have a website can you tell us which
chapter if anybody would like to buy the
data first and what chapter specifically
talking about assessment
it's at the end of chapter four so
there's two sec sections of the book
there's a the first part of the book
sets up the problem and talks about why
we need data first marketing and then
the second part of the book is more
action oriented like how do you start
getting on the right path so in between
those two parts of the book around
chapter four it and i believe chapter
four entirely is is assessment and you
can take this assessment and see where
your marketing organization ranks on
the marketing maturity model the data
first marketing maturity model and so
ultimately no one's going to be perfect
at this right we're all growing every
day and it's a matter of understanding
where am i today assessing where i am
today as a marketing organization and
how do i grow to improve and what steps
should i take and that's what section
two of the book helps you do once you've
assessed where you are
how do i then move my marketing
organization further along that path and
what steps do i need to take
do you have a specific diy template in
the book that people can actually use to
do their own assessments
yeah so that's what the assessment does
it's just it's like a quiz and you just
take the quiz and answer the questions
and at the end it will tell you tally up
the the amount and see where you are you
tell your total score
exactly now we have a sample of that on
the data first marketing book website
it's datadashfirstmarketing.com
and you can take a sample assessment
it's a smaller assessment it gives you
an idea of where you might rank
currently so can you repeat that url one
more time so that we can capture it in
our description at the same time people
can hear that one more time absolutely
it's data dash first
marketing
dot com
when people try to say make assessment
of a data first marketing or even try to
implement it
what are some of the common mistakes
that you see the marketers tend to
encounter
or harnessing the data
one of the biggest ones i see is with
google analytics almost everyone uses
google analytics it's very ubiquitous in
the marketing world oh my god oh i hear
you i hear you look at my eyes sad and
crying
[Laughter]
i know
it's so depressing because tagging can
make or break you really and and what
communication you have access to in
analytics and and whether it's accurate
and just as an example we had a client
the other day who set up something
called a tracking template in google ads
and it overwrote
all of the standard utm tagging that is
done in google ads automatically for you
for google analytics and when it came in
it overwrote all of the the valuable
information that we had so we had to go
in and take and rectify that situation
so we could have a better understanding
of the information of people coming into
the site from google ads and what they
were doing and how they were engaging
with the site so this is more important
for the pay side would you agree i think
also for organic though like if you're
doing organic social sharing and things
like that i think that's really critical
too because you want to make sure that
you understand those investments and the
resources that you're using this
investment and resources
is it paying off what do people do when
they come to your site from let's say a
twitter post right you still want to
know that information and so
sometimes google analytics is good at uh
assessing when
someone has come in organically through
a social channel but it's not a hundred
percent so it's always better to tag if
you can so i would even say for organic
social in particular but but as you said
paid and also i think email marketing as
well
because unfortunately when someone's
coming through an email they're not
coming from a browser there is no
referral source it just looks like
direct traffic and so you want to know
did they come from an email and so email
marketing is another place i think it's
just critical to have utm tagging
the bottom line is tag everything
the other thing i would say as we
mentioned in the book a lot of people
don't always realize that with a utm tag
capitalization matters really i didn't
know that
yes and so for instance tagging like
let's say linkedin let's save your
source is linkedin
use a capital l and a capital i for
linkedin does that mean that you have to
create multiple different possible
tagging
in case people use it differently or you
are just doing the tagging specifically
and just focus on capital l and then
and and then spell exactly like how
linkedin is spelled
what we typically recommend is that you
develop a nomenclature for your
organization it develops standards and
just to make it simple like what we do
in our organization is everything's all
lower case all the time and that makes
it easy because otherwise
it'll see the capital l and the capital
i as a separate source from the lower
case and then your data is segmented in
a way you don't want it segmented so
ideally you want to make sure that
everything is consistent so come up with
a a plan for your organization on how
you're going to approach tagging and
have a standard and then when you do
that that makes it a little bit easier
to ensure that the tagging is done
consistently across the whole
organization i hear you it's much harder
in a bigger organization because there's
probably too many cooks in the kitchen
right and there's probably several
people that do in the utm and also
lagging of course among them they
probably need to have a standard process
and they should be the go-to uh source
to get the utn and the tagging done
and but in a small organization i do
agree with you to actually set up a
process
and make sure that everybody follow that
nomenclature or a specific process and i
have come to realize uh digital digital
marketing specifically the processes and
workflows are super critical
in order to be a modern marketer i think
that's a very specific skill set or
marketing discipline that marketer needs
to possess
absolutely i agree 100
another thing i would like to ask you
specifically analytics tend to be
scattered and fragmented
how should marketers go about
consolidate
if
if that's a possibility
in terms of
looking at
all the data in a very holistic way and
i found that very difficult and
challenging sometimes
many times these different analytics
platforms whether they be owned by
twitter and facebook or whoever or
youtube whatever channel
is that the way that they track may not
be the same way
that google analytics tracks
so the first step is understanding how
each one tracks a good example of that
is for instance when we set up goals in
google analytics
those goals can tend to be a 30 day look
back window and same thing with google
ads
that's not necessarily true for let's
say facebook but it may be different and
so understanding how the different
platforms track and measure differently
is really important but that's why i
like to try as best i can to keep
everything in google analytics that i
can that's why tagging is so important
but in certain cases like you said with
a podcast platform or even youtube where
someone's watching a video on youtube
that may not be translating into your
google analytics because it's on a
separate site or a separate platform
they're not on your website what i
recommend is generally having a
dashboard that you can create and
there's so many great dashboarding tools
that are free or low cost
in order to integrate that data with
like my sales force or like to pull data
out of there i just use
zapier to pull that into a google sheet
and then i put it into data studio
there's lots of great tools you can use
again that are free or low cost that can
help you pull that data out and put it
in one location so you can have a single
view based on what you just said they
can definitely go for agency or
outsource that but it's nice to actually
have somebody technical probably as a
part of marketing organization would you
agree it's certainly helpful to have
someone who is technically knowledgeable
especially around the analytics piece
and who can do this type of programming
but the good news is with tools like
zapier you don't have to know a lot of
html or technical have a lot of
technical knowledge to set that up very
simply and easily marketers should not
feel
intimidated by
pulling this data in because there's so
many great tools like zapier that can
make it really simple you don't need a
lot of technical knowledge to operate it
let me paraphrase you need to know what
you need to measure
and the next step is with data is
fragmented
there are ways zapier is one of the
great tools that you can make that
connection between where the tool is and
the pool that information say
if you use any kind of bi platform and
let's say it's a google data studio and
you can use api to put that information
into a data studio and there's one
dashboard and one central place that you
can view all your
measurement and the metrics is that
correct and also you can use google
sheets to pull into google data studio
so you can pull all the data into google
sheets
and then do calculations if you want so
another good example of using that is
like i'll pull in data from google
analytics but maybe i want to flip the
dimensions and metrics sometimes i i do
want to do that and i can do that by
pulling it into google sheets and then
importing it into data studio so there
are often workarounds you can do or you
can do calculations by using google
sheets as well then and then using that
to be a feeder into data studio so excel
and google she still by default
like
our way of tracking metrics i mean i
don't think we ever get out of that
seriously i'm still using excel sheets i
joke with people that like when i hire
young folks out of college to start a
career in digital marketing i like to
make sure that they understand you need
to love excel and spreadsheets because
that's really a lot of what we do
yeah in addition to having a fairly
in-depth knowledge on google analytics
another thing i 100 agree with you the
requirement is know how to actually work
on the pivot tables writing the macro on
the excel another question i would like
to ask you if you can advise our
listener or people who actually watch
the video to focus on one specific
effort right now to get closer to data
first marketing what would that be well
what's right in front of us is this
google analytics
for migration
i know ga4 i 100 agree with you so do
that migration
i don't love it
well
you need to start thinking about the
migration today because
google is going to sunset universal
analytics for
most users unless you're a 360 user
which is a paid user of google analytics
they're going to sunset
universal analytics on july 1st of next
year 2023
so that means you're going to be forced
to use ga4 starting
july 1st of next year 2023.
so you should start thinking about that
migration now and start tracking that
data in a ga4 property now
so that come next year on july 1st you
have year-over-year data
the other challenge with this is that
google is going to actually erase
all of the ua
information and historical data by
december 1st of 2023 so you also need to
archive your historic data
they are going to erase that data so you
need to migrate the data to ga4 but once
you migrate to ga4 that data will still
intact is that correct no it will not
come over to ga4 so anything that
happens with ga4 will start today when
you start with your ga4 property and
track from today forward so it won't
have historical data in the ga4 property
it'll still be in the ua property the
old one
until december 1st 2023 when google
eradicates it really so it's completely
deletions even you migrate to ga4 that
data will not stay around we need to
start tracking data so we have a one
year worth of data for ga4 but
everything we had in the past
will will be gone
wow
i'm sure there's going to be some
backlash with google maybe they'll
change their mind but as of right now
that's the situation so it's important
to have a migration plan for ga4
and some of the things don't translate
over also like for instance i use
something called content groupings which
allows me as a marketer to say here's
all my pdfs or here's all my white
papers here's all my blog posts and
things like that so i can pull the data
in a group
kind of like you actually
have like a content management library
by different formats of your content
exactly and so there are many marketers
out there who might use content
groupings content groupings are
currently
programmed via the universal analytics
the current analytics interface so you
go in there and you say here's the items
i want like they're all the things in
this subfolder are white papers you know
that sort of thing
in the new ga4
it's done programmatically so what you
have to do is you have to actually tag
the pages themselves on your website as
opposed to doing it in the interface
there are some items that you may be
using today
in universal analytics
that don't translate the same way
into ga4 which is in part why it's so
important to have a migration plan and
to think through all of these rules now
so if you are listening or watching this
specific video and you are using google
analytics as your main platform to track
uh your metrics and make sure you start
looking into your migration plan as soon
as possible you won't regret it
all right very good janet it's wonderful
to have you thank you so much for coming
to my show
thank you pam it was great thanks for
having me take care bye-bye
[Music]
never miss an episode of b2b marketing
and more by following us here on youtube
and leave a comment while you're at it
you can also find episodes wherever you
get your podcasts
[Music]